---
title: 3.2. Conversations
description: How do conversations evolve over time?
date: 2022-07-04
tags:
layout: layouts/post.njk
---
The architecture of a [Proton Relationship](/posts/3-Relationships) reflects a point in time - the protons contain the data needed to encrypt and decrypt the next message in this conversation.

Ordering these messages in a transcript produces a conversation, and similarly, the identities themselves have an ordered relationship over time.

In the simplest case, Alex gets an identity public key and pre-keys for Blair in one of the ways enumerated under [Identities](/posts/3-Identities).  They derive a shared secret using X3DH, and exchange messages using Double Ratchet . The messages sent using keys derived from that first key exchange form a single conversation transcript.

How do Alex and Blair continue their conversation if either of them loses a device? How can they merge and fork conversations as the need arises? Perhaps they wish to fork a conversation they already have into two. Or, they meet in two different contexts or group conversations (e.g. Twitter accounts and an in-person exchange), but don’t need to have a conversation partitioned by those sources of identity. To do so, we need to introduce relations between cryptographic identities.

### Attestations
An attestation is a ciphertext that proves the holders of private keys A and B agreed on a relationship between A and B. This can take the following forms:
- Sequential - B follows A
	- Proposal: $$Sign(Sign(A||B, A), B)$$
- Parallel - A is equivalent to B
	- Proposal: $$Sign(A, B) || Sign(B, A)$$

If A or B are an externally attested identity, they should be encoded with data about the external resource (e.g. a url or certificate chain) that attests to the
Messages from a key B that follows a key A should be merged chronologically with messages from A. Messages from a key B that is equivalent to key A should not be.

We should consider trust to be transmitted directionally in a Sequential relationship, and bidirectionally in a Parallel relationship
- If B follows A
	- I can trust B with the union of trust in A and B
	- I learn nothing new about trust in B
- If A is equivalent to B
	- I can now trust A and B with the union of trust in A and B

These attestations can be used in the following ways:
- Rolling keys over time
- Linking a new identity to an existing one.
	- Alex and Blair met and exchanged keys $$IPK_A$$ and $$IPK_B$$, but Alex wants to prove they also have a Twitter Identity $$IPK_{AT}$$.
		- Alex should generate a new $$IPK_{A-Merged}$$ and present attestations that it follows $$IPK_A$$ and $$IPK_{AT}$$
- Forking threads
	- If Alex wants to fork a conversation they have with Blair across identities  $$IPK_A$$ and $$IPK_B$$, Alex can generate a new identity key $$IPK_{A'}$$, and send a parallel attestation between $$IPK_A$$ and $$IPK_{A'}$$. From Blair’s point of view, $$IPK_{A'}$$ should be a new thread, inheriting whatever trust they had in $$IPK_A$$
- Introductions
	- Backups are a form of introduction to a potential future self. See [backup]
- Merging threads

Introductions and Merging are complex topics that require groups to resolve.

### Conflicts
After issuing an attestation that B follows A, clients should delete the private key for A, and sending chain keys derived from A. (They should keep the receiving keys for some period of time). Future messages should be sent with chain keys derived from B.

Still, conflicts can arise if clients receive conflicting attestations that B follows A, and C follows A. These can result from software bugs, a device with outdated state (see [Devices]), or compromise of private keys. A device with outdated state can heal its state by reaching consensus with a device with newer state about ordering of keys. E.g. by issuing an attestation that C follows B.

Otherwise, these conflicts must be resolved by the user. There are two cryptographic identities claiming to be Blair, which one is correct? Examples of how this might arise:
- Alex introduces Blair to a backup identity $$A’$$ that follows $$A$$.  The backup service is compromised and an attacker attempts to impersonate Alex using $$A’$$. There are now two claims to Alex’s identity.
	- The presumption could be that a use of a backup identity A’ while A is active is fraudulent and should be assumed to be malicious. But Alex’s device might have been compromised, and is attempting to restart their relationship from a backup.
	- Technology can’t resolve this conflict - Blair has to socially resolve this conflict between the two claims to Alex’s identity, for example, by verifying keys in person
- An external attestation is a way of resolving this conflict.
	- It can also be a source of conflict. Blair has a relationship with Alex, and Alex has asserted and equivalence with the public key for \@Alex on twitter at a point in time.
	- If Twitter publishes a new public key for \Alex on Twitter, the association is no longer valid, and we have a conflict
		- Alex can heal the conflict by issuing an attestation with the new public key
		- The conflict may also arise from an account takeover on the external service rather than a compromise of Alex’s device. This conflict also needs to be resolved socially.
