---
title: 4.2. Trust
description: 
date: 2022-07-05
tags:
layout: layouts/post.njk
---
The privacy of my messages - in transit and after receipt - relies on trust in many different parties, including the other party to a relationship.

The proton architecture guarantees that people are exchanging messages with (and only with) who they expect to be talking to, and that they are transmitted with ephemeral addresses. It makes no promises about what happens after the message is received, how many devices the recipient is running, or even if the recipient is running a hosted service where a server stores their signing keys. We should not exclude people from this architecture who - for a variety of reasons - do not use device-bound identities. They may not have a device, or have sufficient trust in their device security or recovery methods.

A very useful property of some messaging apps is ephemerality - that messages disappear after some time, and the client app makes it difficult for the user to exfiltrate them - e.g. by screenshotting. For users to have an assurance of ephemerality, they need stronger assurances about the remote party's software.

This is a known problem with shipping solutions that raise the difficulty of misrepresenting the software that I'm running. Video game clients regularly attest their client software behavior to a server to reduce cheating. iOS has a shipping feature where the OS assists with this attestation[^2].

To get a guarantee of ephemeral messages, I should layer the systems. I trust the relationship manager transmit, securely and privately, messages in a relationship. The other party and I can agree on an app, that implements its own secret sharing atop the relationship channel.

This implies that when client apps exchange messages through a relationship manager, that the remote party's IPK be shared with the app.


[^1]: [Will Cathcart on Twitter](https://twitter.com/wcathcart/status/1546567955671961600) https://twitter.com/wcathcart/status/1546567955671961600

[^2]: [Apple Developer Documentation](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/devicecheck/establishing_your_app_s_integrity) https://developer.apple.com/documentation/devicecheck/establishing_your_app_s_integrity
