---
title: 4.4. Message Privacy in Transit
description: 
date: 2022-07-05
tags:
layout: layouts/post.njk
---
Today, messages - even those that are end to end encrypted - are transmitted with sender and recipient identities in the clear. Eavesdroppers, even if they can’t read the contents, can still determine who is talking to whom, at what time.

The identities serve the following purposes:
- Parties that route messages need to know their destination
- Recipients need to know the originator of a message
	- Encryption schemes depend on the originator identity as the index for which keys to decrypt and authenticate an incoming message
- Spammers can have actions enforced against their sending identity at each step in the transmission chain.

The proton architecture improves on this in two key ways:
- Senders do not attach their identity to the message
	- The return path, e.g to acknowledge receipt of a message, is independent of the path the message was received on.
- In place of the sender-receiver identity pair, adresses now convey the necessary metadata
	- for the receiving service to deliver the message to the intended recipient
	- for the recipient to resolve which relationship a message is intended for

### Virtual Addresses
Receiving services should provide their users with a supply of virtual addresses, and a mechanism for any sender to further diversify an address so that it is resolvable by the receiving service and no one else.

Users should assign virtual addresses to relationships and share them with their correspondents; they should not be reused across relationships as that may inadvertently link relationships. Because virtual addresses should not be shared between conversations, the RS can observe that messages for the same virtual address are part of the same conversation. To further protect metadata about a user’s conversations, users should use multiple virtual addresses in the same conversation - ideally, a distinct address per message.

### Address diversification
This implies that senders and recipients should be able to diversify addresses for a user, producing new addresses that are unlinkable except by the receiving service. We can do so with the following scheme:

We define address diversification on a space of addresses $$A = {0,1}^n$$ as a triple of probabilistic polynomial-time algorithms $$(Gen, Diversify, Resolve)$$ such that

1. The key generation Gen takes as input the security parameter $$1^n$$ and outputs a pair of keys (pk, sk).
2. The probabilistic diversification algorithm Diversify takes as input a public key pk and an address $$a$$ from A, and outputs a diversified address $$d$$.
3. The deterministic Resolve algorithm takes as input a private key $$sk$$, and a diversified address $$d$$, and outputs an address $$a$$ or a symbol denoting failure.

Resolve(Diversify($$a$$, $$pk$$), $$sk$$)  should return $$a$$, and it should not be possible for an adversary to determine $$a$$ given Diversify($$a$$) without $$sk$$.

Diversify should produce indistinguishable outputs, that is, an attacker cannot determine if the output of Diversify was from the same input address, unless they possess the secret key $$sk$$.

A public key encryption scheme should satisfy these requirements.

We apply address diversification as follows:

### Virtual address generation
The goals of this scheme:
- A receiving service can resolve addresses to a user
- Parties other than the receiving service and the user cannot link addresses to the same user
- Parties other than the user cannot link addresses to the same relationship

1. A user and their receiving service agree on a root address $$r$$ ( e.g. a UUID), from which we derive additional addresses. This address cannot be invalidated until all derived addresses have expired, so RM clients should periodically generate a new root address so that old ones can be expired.
2. The Receiving Service generates a diversification keypair ($$pk$$, $$sk$$), and publishes the public diversification key. These keys should also be periodically rotated, and identified by a key generation. So in practice, ($$pk_i$$, $$sk_i$$).
3. The user diversifies the root addresses into recipient-diversified addresses $$RDA_j$$ by applying the diversification function with the RS’s public diversification key:

	$$RDA_j = j || Diversify(r, pk_j)$$

The user should assign distinct RDA’s to each of their relationships, so that presented with a ciphertext addressed to an RDA, the user knows which relationship’s keys it should apply to the ciphertext.

So far, anyone can generate an RDA that resolves to any root address $$p$$, since $$pk$$ is publicly published. We relay on senders using this to diversify addresses to prevent linking by sending services, and we should not rely on the secrecy of a value shared among many users, like the set of all customers of a receiving service.

We can ensure that only a user can generate addresses for themselves, by requiring that RDA’s be signed by the user using a signing key $$S_k$$ generated for this purpose and registered with the RS:

	$$RDAS_j = j || Sign( j || SRDA_j, S_k )$$

where i is the generation of the Receiving service’s public key.

The user then sends addresses of the form $$RDAS_j$$  to remote parties

These remote parties themselves can diversify the RDA_j by applying the RS’s published diversification key:

	$$SDA_j = k ||Diversify(RDAS_j, pk_k)$$

So, a Relationship Manager, when sending a message, should provide the following to it’s sending service (independent of any authentication or private access token required to use the sending service):
- The ciphertext to be decoded by the remote relationship manager
- The receiving service
- A recipient address of the form $$SDA_j$$

The sending service’s responsibility is to look up the receiving service’s configuration (by analog to email, examine the MX record for the recipient domain), and transmit the ciphertext and recipient address.

The receiving service, on receipt of a ciphertext $$c$$ for diversified address $$j || da$$:
- Resolves the sender-diversified address to a recipient-diversified address
	- $$(j || rda || signature) = Resolve(da, sk_k)$$
- Resolves the recipient-diversified address to a root address
	- $$r = Resolve(rda, sk_j)$$
- Checks if a user corresponds to that root address, and users the signature key(s) for that user to verify the signature on the recipient-diversified address.

If both resolution steps, and the signature step succeeds, the receiving service can deliver the message to the user corresponding to the root address.
