---
title: 5.1. Backup
description: 
date: 2022-07-06
tags:
layout: layouts/post.njk
---
People need to be able to continue their conversations if they lose their devices and the data on them. Today, this happens because identities (phone numbers and email addresses) are recoverable by appeal to the authority of the service provider, and often some form of contacts or implicit contacts (in message history) are escrowed with some service providers.

So today, services can impersonate you (in practice, be convinced to allow someone to impersonate - for example in a SIM swap attack), and know who you talk to.

Photon Relationships can be backed up in a variety of ways reflecting different tradeoffs of recovery and security. Most users, who have cryptographic identities stored securely on their devices, should never escrow their device-stored private keys - compromise of private keys would allow an attacker to impersonate the user.

We have technologies shipping at scale today that preserve end to end security and allow users to recover their secrets from other devices in a sync circle, or from an escrowed store protected by a secret only the user knows. There are also shipping technologies where users can back up their private data using shared secrets so that no one party can recover the user's data.[^1] These methods would be safe to store private keys and allow me to recover from loss of a device without disturbing my relationships. I lose my phone, I recover my relationships from my desktop, and life continues.

There are users who do not have devices, who today authenticate to online services with a user secret, and rely on the honest behavior of their service providers to not impersonate them. These users should also be able to participate in Photon relationships, but their relationship manager must be honest in representing that these user’s identities are escrowed and not device bound.

We can provide a third recovery mechanism that is robust against losing all my data and forgetting my recovery secret(s), but has safeguards against the escrow party impersonating me - using the notion of introductions.

### Escrowed Relationship Backup
Alex has a relationship with Blair that is based on cryptographic secrets stored in their respective protons. To protect against the loss of that data, Alex can introduce Blair to a future Alex $$A’$$, and escrow $$A'$$'s keys with a third party.

The data Alex needs to escrow are:
- A long-term address for Blair.
- Blair’s IPK for this relationship
- A signing key for $$A’$$
- A preferred name for Blair

If Alex loses all of their proton data, they can obtain this backup, notify all their relationships of the loss, and use each $$A'$$ to introduce the relationship to a new device resident identity $$A_r$$.

As with introductions, remote parties should only accept the use of this placeholder key $$A'$$ for introduction to a new identity. The escrow party cannot impersonate the Alex, but can falsely claim to be a future, post-recovery Alex $$A_r$$. This should be easy to repudiate if Alex is still online. Recipients of such a recovery message should immediately consult $$A$$, and until they can verify $$A_r$$, consider the possibility that the escrow party had inserted themselves in the conversation.

If Alex’s relationship with Blair is based on a publicly attested identity (i.e. a Twitter handle), Alex can instead rely on Twitter for identity recovery, and to publish a new IPK and address(es) for Alex.

Escrow parties, then, learn about the remote parties that Alex communicates with. They may be able to associate those backed up contacts with outgoing messages to the long-term address, but by design there is nothing to associate those contacts with user’s incoming messages. Receiving services are natural candidates to escrow these contacts. Using two separate receiving services as the system intends, prevents the escrow party from also denying receiving service to prevent repudiation of a misused backup.

[^1]: Apple's account recovery contact: https://support.apple.com/guide/security/account-recovery-contact-security-secafa525057/1/web/1
