---
title: 5.2. Self-Introduction
description: 
date: 2022-07-06
tags:
layout: layouts/post.njk
---
There are circumstances where I want to talk to people I haven’t met yet, or have a means to introduce themselves. E.g. journalists that post a Signal number publicly, or people who publish an email address on their website (often with some obfuscation to defeat web scraping bots).

Ideally, these self-introductions would be to a scoped identity, so I can identify the source of self-introduction, and have mitigations against abuse like rate limiting. What we want, then, is not to post a static address, but an online, interactive resource, that grants a rate-limited introduction.

We can do this by delegating an introduction identity to this introduction service in the following way:
A user generates
	- $$IPK_P$$ as a public identity,
	- a virtual address $$VA$$ marked for incoming self-introduced messages
	- optionally, some message security pre-keys
And gives them to the introduction service. The introduction service generates a delegated introduction IPK and sends it to the user.

The external agent can respond to rate-limited requests by
	- Signing a requester’s IPK with its delegated introduction IPK
	- Diversifying the virtual address derived from VA
And returning those to the requester along with pre-keys (if available)

The user can then accept messages on the VA if they come from an IPK signed by DI. The diversified addresses are single use - they shouldn’t accept messages from different IPK’s.
