---
title: 5.4. Organizational Identity
description: 
date: 2022-07-06
tags:
layout: layouts/post.njk
---

Protons solve a number of problems or businesses (or any organization) that communicate with individuals, for which a phone number is a poor abstraction for the many entities (and vendors) that comprise an organization.

My bank has many phone numbers. There are many scammers who call me posing as my bank, or as a social security agency. People are also habituated to providing authenticating information over the phone, a rich target for phishing.

Organizations today already have a way of establishing a cryptographic identity - through a CA for a domain. Which while imperfect, is a robust claim that a key belongs to Bank of America. And while I might look on the Bank of America website to check that a phone number is actually theirs, attestation and associated identities allow Bank of America to define some set of identities representing different functional teams - their fraud resolution, customer service.

Businesses, like consumers, are also facing a fracturing of their messaging platforms as competing services offer B2C platforms, indexed on the same phone number. Should a business send an SMS, or a platform's variety of message, or blast the customer on all of them? A proton, as a representation of a single relationship, means that senders need to only worry about the priority and mode of the message - to include a push notification to their own app, not which client App the user is more likely to use.

The assumption that sending frequency is capped at the rate of a human's activity is mostly relevant to the relationship between senders devices and their sending service. Organizations are not likely to have device-bound identities, and will likely use a vendor which integrates the relationship manager, and sending and receiving services in a hosted platform. From a receiving service's standpoint, this vendor's sending service that is responsible for all of an organization's B2C relationships, still looks like a well-behaved sending service as it will be sending well-addressed and correctly signed messages to distinct recipients.

Some allowance might need to made for burst activity (push notification updates to sports scores, perhaps), but that can be resolved non-technically with arrangements between receiving and sending services of sufficient volume that such bursts are an issue.